.\" Man page for nic-xray.sh
.\" Written in classic troff/groff format
.TH NIC-XRAY 8 "2026-03-03" "nic-xray 2.9.0" "System Administration Commands"
.SH NAME
nic-xray \- detailed physical network interface diagnostics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nic-xray.sh
.RI [ \-\-lacp ]
.RI [ \-\-vlan ]
.RI [ \-\-bmac ]
.RI [ \-o | \-\-optics ]
.RI [ \-p | \-\-physical ]
.RI [ \-\-all ]
.RI [ \-\-no\-color ]
.RI [ \-\-filter\-link
.IR up | down ]
.RI [ \-s [ SEP ]| \-\-separator [= SEP ]]
.RI [ \-\-group\-bond ]
.RI [ \-m [ SEC ]| \-\-metrics [= SEC ]]
.RI [ \-w [ SEC ]| \-\-watch [= SEC ]]
.RI [ \-\-output
.IR FORMAT ]
.RI [ \-\-diagram\-out
.IR FILE ]
.RI [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.RI [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nic-xray.sh
provides a detailed overview of all physical network interfaces on a Linux
system. It collects and displays PCI slot, driver name, firmware version,
interface name, MAC address, MTU, link status, negotiated speed and duplex,
bond membership, and LLDP peer information (switch name, port, and port
description).
Optionally: LACP status, VLAN tagging, bond MAC address, SFP/QSFP
optical transceiver diagnostics, and physical topology (NUMA node, PCI slot,
NIC vendor/model).
With
.BR \-\-metrics ,
it can also sample real-time traffic metrics: bandwidth, packets/s, drops,
errors, and FIFO errors.
.PP
Supports multiple output formats:
.B table
(default, with dynamic column widths),
.BR csv ,
.BR json ,
and
.B network topology diagrams
.RB ( dot / svg / png ).
.PP
Color coding is used in table output to highlight link status, speed tiers,
bond groupings, and LACP status, making it easy to spot issues at a glance.
.PP
Originally developed for OpenStack node deployments, it is suitable for any
Linux environment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-lacp
Show LACP Aggregator ID and Partner MAC for each bonded interface. Displays
aggregation state: fully converged, partial, or pending.
.IP
Bond-level consistency checks are performed automatically when this flag is
active. The following warnings may appear:
.RS
.TP
.B [Peer Mismatch]
Bond members report different LACP partner MACs, indicating they are connected
to unrelated switches (not an MLAG/EVPN pair). Shown in red.
.TP
.B [AE Mismatch on \fIswitch\fP]
Bond members connected to the same switch have different LLDP PortAggregIDs,
indicating they are wired to different LAG groups on that switch. Shown in red.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-vlan
Show VLAN tagging information obtained from LLDP. Displays VLAN IDs with a
.B [P]
marker for the port VLAN ID (PVID).
.TP
.B \-\-bmac
Show the bridge (bond) MAC address column. Displays the system MAC address
reported by the bonding driver, or
.B N/A
for unbonded interfaces.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-optics
Show SFP/QSFP transceiver optical diagnostics. For each physical interface,
reads DOM (Digital Optical Monitoring) data via
.BR "ethtool \-m" ,
displaying transceiver type, Tx and Rx optical power levels in dBm, and a
health status indicator.
.IP
Health status is evaluated against vendor-programmed DOM thresholds (SFF-8472/SFF-8636)
when available, or against a built-in reference table of industry-standard thresholds:
.RS
.TP
.B OK
Power levels within normal operating range (green).
.TP
.B WARN
Power levels between warning and alarm thresholds (yellow).
.TP
.B ALARM
Power levels beyond alarm thresholds, or zero optical power detected (red).
.TP
.B N/DOM
SFP module is present but provides no DOM data (e.g., DAC cable).
.TP
.B N/A
No SFP module detected, or interface is copper.
.RE
.IP
For multi-lane modules (QSFP+/QSFP28), the worst-case (minimum) power level
across all lanes is shown. If lane variance exceeds 2\ dB, the outlier channel
is flagged (e.g.,
.BR "Ch3\(da2dB" ).
Per-lane detail is available in CSV and JSON output.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-physical
Show physical topology information: NUMA node, PCI slot designation, and NIC
vendor/model. Uses
.BR dmidecode (8)
to resolve physical slot names (e.g., \(lqPCIe Slot 3\(rq) from SMBIOS data;
falls back to raw PCI bus addresses for on-board NICs or when dmidecode is
unavailable. Uses
.BR lspci (8)
for human-readable NIC identification; falls back to raw PCI
vendor/device hex IDs from sysfs if
.B lspci
is not installed.
.IP
When used with diagram output formats
.RB ( dot / svg / png ),
adds NUMA nodes and PCI slot clusters to the topology, showing the hardware
path: Server \(-> NUMA \(-> NIC Card \(-> Ports \(-> Switch Ports \(-> Switches.
Useful for NUMA affinity analysis and PCIe placement.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Enable all optional columns. Equivalent to specifying
.BR \-\-lacp ,
.BR \-\-vlan ,
.BR \-\-bmac ,
.BR \-\-optics ,
and
.B \-\-physical
together.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable color output. Colors are also automatically disabled when standard
output is not a terminal (e.g., when piping to a file or another command).
.TP
.BI \-\-filter\-link " TYPE"
Show only interfaces whose link state matches
.IR TYPE .
Valid values are
.B up
and
.BR down .
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-separator
Add column separators to table output using the default separator
.RB ( \(lq\[u2502]\(rq ).
When used with CSV output, the separator replaces the default comma.
.TP
.BR \-s \fISEP\fR ", " \-\-separator= \fISEP\fR
Use
.I SEP
as the column separator in table and CSV output.
.TP
.B \-\-group\-bond
Sort rows by bond group, then by interface name within each group. Bonded
interfaces are listed first (grouped by bond), followed by unbonded interfaces
sorted alphabetically.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-metrics
Sample real-time interface traffic metrics over a default window of 30 seconds.
The script takes two snapshots of kernel NIC counters before and after the
sampling window, then computes per-second bandwidth, packet rates, and
absolute counts for drops, errors, and FIFO errors.
.IP
This flag is not included in
.B \-\-all
because it introduces a blocking sleep. Metrics require explicit opt-in.
.TP
.BR \-m \fISEC\fR ", " \-\-metrics= \fISEC\fR
Set the metrics sampling duration to
.I SEC
seconds. Valid range is 1 to 3600.
.IP
For non-active-backup bonds with two or more members, a variance check is
performed: if the minimum value among members is less than 70% of the maximum,
the low member is highlighted in red. Active-backup bonds are excluded from
this check since only one member carries traffic by design.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-watch
Enable watch mode: continuously refresh the display, useful during recabling
or live monitoring. The default refresh interval is 5 seconds. Only supported
with table output format and requires a terminal (stdout must be a TTY).
.IP
Uses an alternate screen buffer for clean terminal management (like
.BR top (1)
or
.BR htop (1)).
Press Ctrl\-C to exit; the terminal is restored to its previous state.
.TP
.BR \-w \fISEC\fR ", " \-\-watch= \fISEC\fR
Set the watch refresh interval to
.I SEC
seconds. Valid range is 1 to 3600.
.IP
When combined with
.BR \-\-metrics ,
the metrics sampling duration is set to the watch interval (no additional
sleep between iterations). Without
.BR \-\-metrics ,
a countdown timer is displayed between refreshes.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " FORMAT"
Set the output format.
.I FORMAT
must be one of:
.RS
.TP
.B table
Default. Aligned columns with dynamic widths and color coding.
.TP
.B csv
Comma-separated values (or custom separator via
.BR \-s ).
No color codes.
.TP
.B json
JSON array of objects. No color codes.
.TP
.B dot
Graphviz DOT source to stdout. No external dependencies. All optional columns
(LACP, VLAN, bond MAC) are automatically included.
.TP
.B svg
Render a network topology diagram in SVG format using
.BR dot (1)
from graphviz. Output is saved to a file (see
.BR \-\-diagram\-out ).
All optional columns are automatically included.
.TP
.B png
Same as
.B svg
but renders in PNG format.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-diagram\-out " FILE"
Set the output file path for
.B svg
or
.B png
diagram formats. Defaults to
.IR /tmp/nic\-xray\-<hostname>.{svg,png} .
Ignored for other output formats.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.SH OUTPUT COLUMNS
The following columns are always displayed:
.TP
.B Device
PCI slot identifier (e.g.,
.IR 0000:3b:00.0 ).
.TP
.B Driver
Kernel driver name for the network adapter as reported by
.BR ethtool (8)
(e.g.,
.IR mlx5_core ", " ixgbe ).
.TP
.B Firmware
Network adapter firmware version as reported by
.BR ethtool (8).
.TP
.B Interface
Linux network interface name (e.g.,
.IR eth0 ", " eno1 ).
.TP
.B MAC Address
Permanent hardware MAC address. For bonded interfaces, the address is
extracted from
.IR /proc/net/bonding/ .
.TP
.B MTU
Maximum Transmission Unit configured on the interface.
.TP
.B Link
Operational state:
.B up
or
.BR down .
.TP
.B Speed/Duplex
Negotiated link speed and duplex mode (e.g.,
.IR "10000Mb/s (Full)" ).
Shows
.B N/A
when the link is down or speed cannot be determined.
.TP
.B Parent Bond
Name of the bond master interface, or
.B None
if the interface is not bonded.
.TP
.B Switch Name
LLDP-reported remote switch system name.
.TP
.B Port Name
LLDP-reported remote port identifier.
.TP
.B Port Descr
LLDP-reported remote port description. For Cisco ACI fabrics, the raw topology
path (e.g.,
.IR pathep\-[POLICY] )
is automatically formatted as
.BI "VPC: " POLICY_NAME
for readability. Shows
.B N/A
when no port description is available.
.PP
The following columns are shown only when their respective flags are used:
.TP
.B Bond MAC
(shown with
.BR \-\-bmac )
System MAC address of the bond.
.TP
.B LACP Status
(shown with
.BR \-\-lacp )
LACP aggregation details: Aggregator ID, partner MAC, and convergence state.
Bond-level consistency warnings
.RB ( "[Peer Mismatch]" ", " "[AE Mismatch]" )
are appended when misconfigurations are detected.
.TP
.B VLAN
(shown with
.BR \-\-vlan )
VLAN IDs from LLDP, with
.B [P]
indicating the port VLAN ID.
.PP
The following columns are shown when
.B \-\-physical
is used:
.TP
.B NUMA
(shown with
.BR \-\-physical )
NUMA node ID for the PCI device (e.g.,
.IR 0 ", " 1 ).
Shows
.B N/A
when NUMA information is unavailable (e.g., single-socket systems or VMs).
.TP
.B PCI Slot
(shown with
.BR \-\-physical )
Physical slot designation from SMBIOS (e.g.,
.IR "PCIe Slot 3" ),
or PCI bus address without function number (e.g.,
.IR 0000:19:00 )
for on-board NICs.
Interfaces sharing the same PCI slot belong to the same physical NIC card.
.TP
.B NIC Model
(shown with
.BR \-\-physical )
NIC model name from
.BR lspci (8)
(e.g.,
.IR "Ethernet Controller X710 for 10GbE SFP+" ).
Falls back to raw PCI device ID when
.B lspci
is not available.
.PP
The following columns are shown when
.B \-\-optics
is used:
.TP
.B SFP Type
(shown with
.BR \-\-optics )
Transceiver type identifier (e.g.,
.IR 10GBASE-SR ", " 100GBASE-LR4 ).
Shows
.B N/A
for interfaces without an SFP module.
.TP
.B Optics Tx
(shown with
.BR \-\-optics )
Transmit optical power level in dBm with health status.
For multi-lane modules, shows the worst-case (minimum) value across all channels.
.TP
.B Optics Rx
(shown with
.BR \-\-optics )
Receive optical power level in dBm with health status.
For multi-lane modules, shows the worst-case value. Lane variance is flagged
when the difference between best and worst channels exceeds 2\ dB.
.PP
The following columns are shown when
.B \-\-metrics
is used:
.TP
.B Bandwidth
Receive and transmit throughput in human-readable units (B/s, KB/s, MB/s,
GB/s), computed from the sampling window.
.TP
.B Packets/s
Receive and transmit packet rates per second.
.TP
.B Drops
Receive and transmit packet drops during the sampling window. Highlighted in
red if greater than zero.
.TP
.B Errors
Receive and transmit errors during the sampling window. Highlighted in red if
greater than zero.
.TP
.B FIFO Errors
Receive and transmit FIFO (ring buffer overflow) errors during the sampling
window. Highlighted in red if greater than zero.
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.SS Table (default)
Columns are dynamically sized to fit the widest value. Color codes highlight
link status, speed tiers, bond membership, and LACP status. Use
.B \-s
to add visible column separators.
.SS CSV
Plain-text comma-separated output suitable for import into spreadsheets or
processing with tools like
.BR awk (1).
No color codes are emitted. The default comma delimiter can be changed with
.BR \-s .
.SS JSON
A JSON array where each element is an object representing one interface.
All fields use plain strings without color codes. Optional fields
.RB ( bond_mac ", " lacp_status ", " vlan )
are included only when their respective flags are active. The
.B port_descr
field is always included.
.SS DOT / SVG / PNG (Diagram)
Generates a left-to-right network topology diagram showing server-to-switch
connectivity. All optional data columns (LACP, VLAN, bond MAC) are
automatically enabled for diagram formats.
.PP
Visual elements:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \(bu 3
.B Server node
on the left with hostname, hardware vendor and model (from DMI), serial number
in brackets (from DMI), and operating system (from
.IR /etc/os\-release ).
Falls back to a plain \(lqServer\(rq label when hardware information is
unavailable (e.g., in containers or VMs without DMI)
.IP \(bu
.B Bond clusters
with dashed blue borders grouping member interfaces and LACP status label
.IP \(bu
.B Interface nodes
with colored border (green=UP, red=DOWN), showing interface name, MAC address, MTU,
and optionally traffic metrics when
.B \-\-metrics
is active: bandwidth with colored direction arrows
.RB ( "green \(da" " = Rx," " blue \(ua" " = Tx" ),
and a red error row if drops, errors, or FIFO errors are detected
.IP \(bu
.B Edge labels
showing VLAN information near the NIC end and negotiated speed tier near
the switch port end. PVID is bold and underlined to distinguish it from
tagged VLANs
.IP \(bu
.B Edge thickness
scales with negotiated speed tier (thicker = faster): Fast Ethernet, 1 GbE,
10 GbE, 25 GbE, 100 GbE, 400 GbE, 800 GbE
.IP \(bu
.B Edge color
green for UP links, red for DOWN links
.IP \(bu
.B Switch nodes
with orange border on the right, showing hardware brand, model, serial number
in brackets (from vendor-specific LLDP TLVs), and firmware version parsed from
the LLDP SysDescr field. Supports Juniper and Cisco vendor-specific TLVs for
serial extraction. Cisco ACI fabric switches are also supported: when SysDescr
is a topology path, model and firmware are extracted from vendor TLVs (SubTypes
214 and 210). Juniper, Cisco (NX-OS, IOS, and ACI), and Arista patterns are
supported for SysDescr parsing. Falls back to raw SysDescr text (truncated) or
a plain \(lqSwitch\(rq label when no LLDP data is available.
Switch port nodes include the port description as a subtitle when available
.IP \(bu
.B Disconnected interfaces
shown with dashed gray lines to a \(lqNo LLDP peer\(rq label
.PD
.RE
.PP
The diagram uses a dark theme (Catppuccin Mocha-inspired) for good contrast
in both SVG and PNG output.
.PP
The
.B dot
format outputs raw Graphviz DOT source to stdout with no external
dependencies, allowing the user to render it with any Graphviz-compatible
tool. The
.B svg
and
.B png
formats require the
.BR dot (1)
command from graphviz.
.SH COLOR CODING
In table output, colors indicate:
.TP
.B Speed tiers
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 12
Magenta
200 Gbps and above
.TP
Cyan
100 Gbps
.TP
White
25 / 40 / 50 Gbps
.TP
Green
10 Gbps
.TP
Yellow
1 Gbps
.TP
Red
Below 1 Gbps or unknown
.PD
.RE
.TP
.B Link status
Green for
.BR up ,
red for
.BR down .
.TP
.B Bond names
Each bond is assigned a distinct color (blue, cyan, yellow, magenta, white)
cycling through a palette to visually group member interfaces.
.TP
.B LACP status
Green for fully converged, yellow for partial, red for pending or mismatch
warnings.
.TP
.B Metrics
Drops, errors, and FIFO errors are red when greater than zero. For
non-active-backup bonds, bandwidth and packet rates are red for members whose
value is below 70% of the maximum within the bond (traffic imbalance).
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.B nic-xray.sh
must be run as
.BR root .
.PP
The following commands must be available in
.BR PATH :
.PP
.RS
.BR ethtool (8),
.BR lldpctl (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR awk (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR cat (1),
.BR readlink (1)
.RE
.PP
For diagram output formats
.RB ( svg ", " png ),
the
.BR dot (1)
command from the
.B graphviz
package must be installed. The
.B dot
output format has no external dependency beyond the base requirements.
.PP
The
.B \-\-physical
flag uses
.BR dmidecode (8)
to resolve physical slot designations from SMBIOS data, and
.BR lspci (8)
from the
.B pciutils
package to resolve PCI vendor and device names. Both are optional: without
.BR dmidecode ,
the raw PCI bus address is shown; without
.BR lspci ,
raw hex PCI IDs from sysfs are shown.
.PP
The
.B \-\-optics
flag uses
.B ethtool \-m
to read SFP/QSFP module EEPROM data, which requires kernel support for the
NIC's I2C/MDIO bus. Most modern NIC drivers (i40e, ixgbe, mlx5_core) support
this. If the kernel module does not support EEPROM access, optics data will
show as
.BR N/A .
.PP
The
.B lldpd
service should be running to retrieve LLDP information from connected switches.
The switches must also be configured to advertise LLDP messages.
.PP
On Cisco switches, VLAN information may not be advertised by default; enable it
with:
.PP
.RS
.B lldp tlv-select vlan-name
.RE
.SH RECOMMENDATIONS
Copy the script to
.B /usr/local/sbin
for easy access:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo cp nic-xray.sh /usr/local/sbin/
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/sbin/nic-xray.sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
Ensure the
.B lldpd
service is running to retrieve LLDP information:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo systemctl enable \-\-now lldpd
.RE
.PP
A bash completion script is provided under
.IR completions/nic\-xray.bash .
To enable tab-completion in the current session:
.PP
.RS
.B source completions/nic\-xray.bash
.RE
.PP
To install system-wide (into
.IR /etc/bash_completion.d ):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo make install\-completion
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
Error: not running as root, missing required commands, or invalid options.
.SH EXAMPLES
Default table view:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh
.RE
.PP
Show VLAN information:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-vlan
.RE
.PP
Show LACP peer information:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-lacp
.RE
.PP
Show bond MAC address:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-bmac
.RE
.PP
Show VLAN and LACP information with column separators:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-vlan \-\-lacp \-s
.RE
.PP
Show SFP/QSFP optical transceiver diagnostics:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-optics
.RE
.PP
Show physical topology (NUMA node, PCI slot, NIC model):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-physical
.RE
.PP
Show all optional columns at once:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-all
.RE
.PP
Table output with default column separators:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-s
.RE
.PP
Table output with a custom separator:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-separator='|'
.RE
.PP
Group by bond (bonded interfaces first, then unbonded):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-group\-bond
.RE
.PP
Group by bond with all optional columns and separators:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-group\-bond \-\-all \-s
.RE
.PP
Show only interfaces with link up:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-filter\-link up
.RE
.PP
Show only interfaces with link down:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-filter\-link down
.RE
.PP
Disable color output:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-no\-color
.RE
.PP
CSV output:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output csv
.RE
.PP
Pipe-delimited CSV:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output csv \-\-separator='|'
.RE
.PP
Tab-separated CSV:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output csv \-\-separator=$'\\t'
.RE
.PP
JSON output:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output json
.RE
.PP
JSON output with all optional fields:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-vlan \-\-lacp \-\-bmac \-\-output json
.RE
.PP
Generate DOT source for external rendering:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output dot > topology.dot
.RE
.PP
Generate an SVG topology diagram:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output svg
.RE
.PP
Generate a PNG diagram with custom output path:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-output png \-\-diagram\-out /tmp/network.png
.RE
.PP
Sample real-time traffic metrics (30-second default):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-metrics
.RE
.PP
Sample metrics over a custom 5-second window:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-metrics=5
.RE
.PP
Metrics with CSV output (raw numeric values):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-metrics \-\-output csv
.RE
.PP
Metrics with JSON output (nested metrics object):
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-metrics \-\-output json
.RE
.PP
Metrics included in topology diagram:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-metrics \-\-output svg
.RE
.PP
Watch mode with default 5-second refresh:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-watch
.RE
.PP
Watch mode with custom 3-second refresh:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-watch=3
.RE
.PP
Watch mode with live traffic metrics:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-watch \-\-metrics
.RE
.PP
Watch mode with all optional columns:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-watch \-\-all
.RE
.PP
Display version:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-version
.RE
.PP
Display help:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo nic-xray.sh \-\-help
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte <ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ethtool (8),
.BR lldpctl (8),
.BR lspci (8),
.BR dmidecode (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR dot (1),
.BR bonding (7)
